The remains of two first world war soldiers have been finally laid to rest, almost a century after they were killed in action.
Lieutenant John Pritchard and Private Christopher Elphick, of The Honourable Artillery Company (HAC), were interred in the HAC Cemetery at Ecoust-St Mein near Arras in France.
Relatives of both men, who were killed on 15 May 1917 during an enemy attack near Bullecourt, while serving with the HAC's 2nd Battalion, travelled to France for the ceremony where the men, along with two unidentified comrades, were buried with full military honours.
More than 300 people attended the ceremony, including Prince Michael of Kent in his capacity as HAC royal honorary colonel.
The men were buried on Tuesday two miles from where they fell in Bullecourt next to the Hindenburg Line.
Pritchard, who survived the battle of the Somme and a gunshot wound to the neck, was killed alongside Elphick when their battalion was attacked during the second battle of Bullecourt.
Their remains were found in 2009 by a farmer, Didier Guerle, along with those of two other unidentified HAC soldiers.
Guerle has never ploughed the field but unearthed one of the soldier's gas canisters in 2009, then dug a little deeper to remove it, finding the remains.
Pritchard was identified by a silver identity bracelet, and Elphick by a gold signet ring that bears his initials, but it took three years to trace their relatives.
Two further sets of remains could not be identified, but they were interred at the same time as "HAC soldiers known unto God".
The soldiers were given full military honours, their coffins draped in the union flag carried by bearer parties, with the regimental forage cap, belt, and wreath on top, accompanied by the HAC band.
A military firing party fired a salute during the service and two of Pritchard's great-nieces and their husbands performed Crossing The Bar – which John Pritchard played to his mother and sister before he left for France the final time.
The families were presented with the flag covering the coffins, as well as Pritchard's identity bracelet and Elphick's signet ring.
Pritchard's family were also given his officer's sword by an American collector who had come across the sword in the US, and donated it back to his family.
Pritchard had the sword made in September 1915 while he was recuperating from injury in the UK.
His battlefield will bequeathed the sword to his brother Ernest, who emigrated to the US in 1919.
Pritchard's nephew John Shell laid a wreath on behalf of the family during the ceremony.
The 89-year-old, from Winchester, said it was an incredible experience.
"I can hardly put it into words," he said, adding that despite knowing about his uncle's death in the first world war, they never expected his remains to be found, until 18 months ago when they were informed.
"It never entered your head, after all these years why should it?
"It seems silly to say it but the feeling I had was that he is coming home. He isn't of course, but that was the feeling."
Shell, who was among more than 30 members of the Pritchard family, said it was particularly emotional visiting Bullecourt, where the soldiers were killed.
"Unexpectedly to me I was completely overwhelmed, my emotions just took charge."
Pritchard, born in Wandsworth, south London, in 1886, was the eldest of three boys in a family of seven.
He attended St Paul's Cathedral school and was a chorister. He worked as an inspector at the Alliance Assurance Company before joining the HAC in 1909.
Elphick was born in Dulwich, south London, in 1889 and attended Alleyn's school before becoming an insurance company clerk and joining the HAC in 1916.
Pritchard never married, but Elphick left a widow and newborn son, Ronald Douglas, who was born in August 1916.
Ronald never knew his father, but kept his memory alive for his two sons, Christopher, named after his grandfather, and Martin, who travelled to France for the burial with their families.
Chris Elphick, 64, from Cross In Hand in East Sussex, said: "It means a tremendous amount to have this wonderful ceremony. We feel incredibly honoured about this; it's putting an end to a mystery that has been with our family for almost 100 years.
"All we knew was that he went missing during the first world war and that was it. My grandmother and my father were in complete ignorance about the situation and he ended up being found in the strangest way, just out of the blue."
He said the ceremony was emotional, adding: "I was virtually in tears in a fair number of places."
His brother Martin, 61, who lives near Bath, Somerset, said the ceremony would have been the "closing of the circle" for his father and grandmother.
Of his father, he said: "Like many of his generation, he didn't like to talk about it, and I think he was less confident than he would have been because of it.
"He used to say he didn't know if he was being a good father because he didn't know what it was like to have a father himself. But I know he was very proud of his father, and came to Arras to see his name on the memorial years ago because there was nowhere else to go. So I know he would have been very proud to see this today."
Pritchard's great-niece, Janet Shell, 54, from Walton-on-Thames, Surrey, said they had always known about John Pritchard because of a plaque for him at St Paul's Cathedral, but by chance she searched his name on the internet in January 2012 and found a forum discussing him and asking if any of his relatives had been found.
"It really is the most momentous thing that could ever happen to a family, and being here today is the culmination of something we have been talking about for 15 months in my family and for many years before by my mother's generation.
"This is bringing it full circle with us all here representing our great-grandmother who connects us all, and gives us somewhere to come in the future for the next generation."
The Honourable Artillery Company, the oldest regiment in the British army, was incorporated by Royal Charter in 1537 by King Henry VIII.
Its regiments have fought in both world wars and the current regiment forms part of the Territorial Army.