Boiling the most controversial decisions of the last decade down to a four minute computer game might not be the most subtle way of rehabilitating a presidential legacy, but George W Bush was never one for diplomatic niceties.
Visitors to his official library, which opens in Dallas on Thursday, will be presented with the interactive exhibit asking them to second guess four key moments in his presidency: removing Saddam Hussein, the US army "surge" in Iraq, bailing out the banks and responding to hurricane Katrina.
Whether they improve on his decision-making record remains to be seen, but the library opening marks a concerted effort among his supporters to soften the reputation of a president who left office with lowest approval ratings in recent US history.
They will be helped by the official pomp that surrounds such events, with presidents Obama, Clinton, Carter and HW Bush all due to give speeches highlighting the positive aspects of the 43rd presidency.
"It will be a little like a wedding without the alcohol," says Danielle Pletka of the right-leaning American Enterprise Institute. "It doesn't matter how much you hate the mother-in-law, people find nice things to say."
Aides say a conscious effort has also been made to make the library look more "approachable". While Bill Clinton opted for soaring architecture, jutting out over Arksanas river, and Richard Nixon's palm-thronged villa in California barely mentioned Watergate, the Bush library is surrounded by native Texas prairie flowers on a university campus that tries to tackle his critics head on.
The makeover appears to be having some effect – among Americans, at least. Recent domestic polling shows Bush's ratings have recovered to the point where 47% approve of his eight years in office versus 50% who don't.
"Bush derangement syndrome has abated and people are capable of bit more of reflection," says Pletka. "Absence makes the heart grow fonder."
Although reticent to draw direct links to the Boston bombing, she argues that the continued terrorist threat and revolutions in North Africa and the Middle East should cast Bush's interventionist foreign policy in a fresh light.
"The Arab spring is an outgrowth of the changes that happened during the Bush administration," claims Pletka. "Whether people like it or not, the recognition that you were not fated forever to live under a brutal dictator was something like changed perspectives."
More moderate Washington veterans are less sure. Stephen Hess, who served as an advisor to presidents Ford and Carter, says Bush supporters face an uphill battle.
"It is going to take a very long time to rehabilitate Bush's reputation," he argues. "It may never happen."
"We judge presidents on two factors – foreign policy and the economy – and he is just not going to look very good on either. Basically, he got us into a war with a heap of misinformation."
Even Pletka concedes that Bush remains "out of vogue" with Republicans on domestic issues, where his is demonised by Tea Party supporters for letting government spending run out of control, but she insists a proper historical perspective will take time.
"People are still looking to argue about Roosevelt and his domestic agenda and for many the jury is still on Harry Truman," she adds.
Hannah Abney of the Bush Center says the library does not attempt to "editorialise" the Bush presidency, but presents the facts in a neutral way to let visitors make up their own minds.
It will also focus on less controversial aspects of his legacy such as support for Aids victims in Africa. Bush and his wife, Laura, will travel to Tanzania this summer to launch a new initiative promoting cancer screening for women in Africa.