Anna Soubry, the outspoken public health minister, has said David Cameron appointed her to the post because it is wrongly seen as the "soft bloody girly option".
In another of her trademark interviews, in which she attacked the "twattery" of Tory speculation about the prime minister's future, Soubry said she hoped her successor would be a man to change the perception that women should be public health minister.
Soubry told the May issue of Total Politics: "I've noticed that every public health minister has been a woman, and it's been seen as the soft, girly option. It's bloody well not, it's one of the most important jobs."
In last September's government reshuffle Soubry replaced Anne Milton, now a whip, who was appointed after the 2010 election. The previous occupants under the last government were Gillian Merron (2009-10), Dawn Primarolo (2007-09), Caroline Flint (2005-07), Melanie Johnson (2003-2005), Hazel Blears (2002-03) Yvette Cooper (1999-2002) and Tessa Jowell (1997-99).
Soubry said she privately questioned the prime minister's judgment when he offered her the post during a meeting in the cabinet room in Downing Street. "To be quite frank, when the PM said to me: 'I want you to do public health,' I thought: 'Oh boss, I respect you so much, but I'm the only woman here and I get public health – I hope there's no connection there.'
"Maybe I can make people realise that this is not a soft bloody girly option, it is a big serious job. I'm a huge fan of our prime minister … but I did sit there in the cabinet room and think: 'Boss, you do know what you've just done? You've given public health to the girl again, except I'm not a girl, I'm a tough old bird.'"
In her interview Soubry criticised Tories – guilty of "doom and gloominess" in her words – who have been speculating about Cameron's future. She said: "When people talk about such-and-such a person as an alternative to Cameron, there is no vacancy … What we now need to do is stop people in the party engaging in quite a lot of twattery, and to accept that we've achieved a huge amount, and it's all to play for.
"I came into politics to fight lefties … That's where political fighting goes. The Tory party must learn from its own history that when we fight each other, you can guarantee to lose."
The former barrister and television presenter also defends government plans to introduce a minimum price for alcohol although the policy has unofficially been dropped. "It's still official policy," she tells Total Politics. At this point the magazine says "her piercing eyes widen in innocence".
But she says she understands why senior government figures, believed to be the home secretary, Theresa May, are opposed to the measure. "Don't get me wrong, I absolutely understand why it would be that someone at a senior level in government was saying: 'Well, the political cost would be … [that] it looks like a step too far, it looks too much of a nanny state.'
"You have to get the balance right, especially with public health, so that you take the measures that benefit the public's health, but without causing people to resent you so that you actually don't cure the ill that you seek to cure."
A plan to set a minimum price for alcohol of 45p a unit was dropped at the time of the budget in the face of opposition from the home secretary. The government is to look at other measures to discourage excessive drinking.