Italy appeared to be on the verge of resolving its weeks-long political stalemate after the country's president asked a senior figure in the centre-left Democratic party (PD) to form a grand coalition government including Silvio Berlusconi's centre-right People of Freedom (PdL) party.
Enrico Letta, deputy leader of the PD, said he had accepted a mandate to become Italy's prime minister-designate with "a sense of deep responsibility" given the "very difficult, fragile, unprecedented" situation of the country.
"The country is waiting for a government. Everyone knows this is situation that cannot go on like this," he said, adding that politics in Italy had "lost all credibility".
Letta said he would try to form "a government of service to the country".
He was speaking after meeting Giorgio Napolitano, who was re-elected head of state at the weekend. The 87-year-old said he had chosen Letta because he was from a younger generation but already had significant experience in parliament.
Letta will now have to pick ministers for his cabinet. The government, which is expected to make the reform of Italy's electoral law and the restarting of its stagnant economy its priorities, will then face confidence votes in parliament. Letta, at 46, would become one of Europe's youngest leaders.
The move comes after two months of political paralysis in which the centre-left under Pier Luigi Bersani failed to form a minority government, was rebuffed by the anti-establishment Five Star Movement and refused to enter into a grand coalition with Berlusconi's PdL. Bersani, severely compromised by the deadlock and by the chaotic presidential election that followed, has now resigned.
Letta, who was his deputy for four years, is viewed as a moderate who has support within in his own party and is not unacceptable to the centre-right. His uncle, Gianni Letta, is one of Berlusconi's senior aides.
Giuliano Amato, a former prime minister who had also been tipped for the role, said he was "absolutely" satisfied with Napolitano's selection of Letta. Fittingly for a week of swirling speculation and political intrigue, the 74-year-old Amato was on his way to an exhibition, opening on Thursday, celebrating Machiavelli's The Prince.
The other protagonist in the drama, Matteo Renzi, the young mayor of Florence who on Tuesday had appeared to have the backing of many in his party, was reported on Wednesday to have been effectively blocked as a possible premier by Berlusconi.
The billionaire former prime minister was quoted as having told allies he did not want to give a helping hand to the man he believes will be his most formidable opponent in the future.