A close friend of Prince William and Prince Harry is suing News International over alleged phone hacking by the News of the World.

Harry Meade has filed a civil claim against News Group Newspapers, the News International subsidiary that published the now-defunct Sunday tabloid, at the high court in London.

Meade has been close to the princes for over a decade, on occasion appearing in press articles about the antics of Prince Harry.

He hosted the now-infamous fancy dress party in 2005 where Prince Harry wore a swastika armband, prompting an international furore and a swift apology from Clarence House.

The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge – known to most as Prince William and Kate Middleton – attended Meade's wedding in October 2010 in an appearance that prompted speculation, later confirmed, that they were engaged.

Meade is one of eight fresh phone-hacking claims filed against News International in the past month.

Another claiming damages for breach of privacy is Dr Hasnat Khan, the former lover of Princess Diana. An eminent heart and lung surgeon, Khan had a two-year relationship with the princess that ended months before her death in 1997.

He told the Mail on Sunday last year after discovering his voicemails may have been intercepted: "To know that someone has been listening to your private messages is awful. It is absolutely terrible. It feels as if you have been robbed. We live in the UK. We are supposed to have civil liberties. I feel really, really violated. I am very angry."

Others to have filed claims against News International in the past four weeks are Susan Katona, the mother of singer Kerry, and former Atomic Kitten performer Jenny Frost. Others named in court documents are Dionne Lazette Webber, Ronald George Gray and Jonathan M W Sedgwick.

On Friday, the high court heard that eight others – including Matthew Doyle, former deputy director of communications for Tony Blair when he was prime minister, and ex-Blue Peter presenter John Leslie – have accepted undisclosed damages from News International over phone hacking by News of the World. They are among a total of 149 to have settled civil cases against the newspaper group since the height of the hacking saga in 2011.

A spokeswoman for News International said: "We are looking at the details of all these claims."

To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@guardian.co.uk or phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for publication".
• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian on Twitter and Facebook.