Luis Suárez has been handed a 10-game ban for his bite on Chelsea's Branislav Ivanovic at Anfield on Sunday, leading to a fierce response from Liverpool who say they "shocked and disappointed" at the punishment.
A three-man independent regulatory commission, impartial to both Liverpool and Chelsea, opted for the lengthy suspension after considering the Football Association's charge of violent conduct against a written submission from the Anfield club on Wednesday morning.
An FA statement said: "A three-person independent regulatory commission today upheld the FA's claim that a suspension of three matches was clearly insufficient and the player will serve a further seven first-team matches in addition to the standard three. The suspension begins with immediate effect."
The 26-year-old will now miss the remaining four games of this season and the first six domestic matches of the next campaign, potentially ruling the Uruguayan striker out until October, although he has until midday on Friday to appeal the additional suspension.
The Liverpool managing director, Ian Ayre, said: "Both the club and player are shocked and disappointed at the severity of today's Independent Regulatory Commission decision. We await the written reasons [on Thursday] before making any further comment."
Suárez had accepted the violent conduct charge but, in a stance that undermined his shows of contrition and Liverpool's swift reaction to his latest indiscretion, claimed the offence did not warrant more than an automatic three-match ban for violent conduct.
Suárez received an eight-match ban plus a £40,000 fine for using racially abusive language towards Manchester United's Patrice Evra last season and Wednesday's commission could take that into account if they wished. He was also banned for seven matches by the Dutch FA in November 2010 for sinking his teeth into Otman Bakkal of PSV Eindhoven.
Liverpool were concerned that Suárez's chequered past and pressure from prime minister David Cameron's office would increase the severity of his punishment for biting the Chelsea defender. The club and Suárez acted swiftly with their apologies and condemnation on Sunday, and publicised his donation of a club fine to the Hillsborough Family Support Group, only to invite fresh criticism for contesting the FA's stance that a three-match ban would be "clearly insufficient".