Five thousand permanent jobs will be created on the site of the Maze/Long Kesh prison near Belfast that once housed some of the world's most dangerous paramilitaries, developers predict.
The Maze/Long Kesh Development Corporation has also promised a £300m investment, and in the initial reconstruction phase some 2,000 workers will be recruited.
The 5,000 jobs the company claims the project will create will be in construction, in the running of the Royal Ulster Agricultural Society's new headquarters, the museum on the site and general maintenance of the massive former prison site.
The announcement on Wednesday comes amid fresh controversy over the company's plans to build an international peace and conflict study centre on the grounds.
The Ulster Unionist party and Traditional Unionist Voice, alongside Ukip, have launched a Northern-Ireland-wide petition this week opposing the centre, which they claim Sinn Féin will turn into an "IRA shrine".
The three parties are particularly concerned about the retention of the prison hospital where 10 IRA and Irish National Liberation Army hunger strikers died in 1981.
Sinn Féin denies the claims and says it will tell the story of the prison, known locally as H-Blocks, from all viewpoints, including those of loyalist prisoners and the security forces that guarded it.
Announcing plans for the development of the site, a former second world war airfield, Terence Brannigan, chairman of the Maze/Long Kesh Development Corporation, said: "We have already had significant international interest shown in developing the site and we anticipate that global investors will be excited about what is an unprecedented development opportunity.
"For the people of Northern Ireland, in these very difficult times, it is an opportunity we simply cannot afford to ignore."
The Maze/Long Kesh programme is the largest site in UK public ownership, with 347 acres ready for redevelopment. It is twice as large as Belfast's Titanic Quarter and four times the size of London's Canary Wharf. This week the Titanic centre said it had attracted more than 800,000 visitors in its first year.
Brannigan added: "Since the corporation's establishment only seven months ago, we have created real momentum. It is already the region's largest construction site, having nine local construction companies and 24 material suppliers working there. Before the end of the year we will cut the sod on the new PbCRC (Peace building and Conflict Resolution Centre) and provide work for a further 70 construction workers.
"Our vision, from Peace to Prosperity, is intended to demonstrate how economic development can help consolidate and build upon our peace. We will promote the PbCRC, with its unique Belfast to New York design collaboration, as a showcase to attract international developers and investors. From the interest already shown, I am confident that we will have in place £100m investment by 2016."
Addressing unionist concerns over the future of the site, Brannigan added: "I am acutely conscious of the sensitivity of this site, but Maze/Long Kesh is already changing. In a couple of weeks we will welcome the Balmoral show to Maze/Long Kesh. The show is a new chapter in the long and varied history of this site and a new phase for the Royal Ulster Agricultural Society."