Primark has continued to defy the economic gloom that has dogged other fashion retailers by reporting a 24% jump in sales, as its strategy of embracing the high street over the internet has paid off.
The bargain clothing chain saw sales rise to £2bn in the six months to the beginning of March, with operating profits increasing 56% to £238m. The huge leap in turnover is largely due to new shopfloor space, but like-for-like sales, which strip out new openings, rose 7%.
Primark is steadfast in its opposition to an online operation, preferring to open new and bigger stores at a time when high street rivals are focusing on multichannel sales, smartphone apps and click-and-collect services.
Parent company Associated British Foods, which owns brands including Silver Spoon sugar and Twinings tea, called the Primark results an "exceptional performance". They contributed to a 10% rise in group sales to £6.3bn, with half-year pre-tax profits up 26% from £329m to £415m.
ABF's chief executive, George Weston, said: "It's had an absolutely brilliant start to the year. We think the stores are looking great and the spring/summer merchandise is doing great, and we're just waiting for some warmth to get even more people in.
"What we attempt to do is sell clothes which are on fashion at lower prices than anyone else, in good high street locations with great stores. When we get it right shoppers respond."
Primark said it benefited from a low cotton price, a weaker US dollar and from fewer promotions. Trading was hit slightly by the poor winter weather, one of the coldest on record, but several store openings helped the rise in sales.
The retailer has opened 15 new stores in the past six months, including six in Spain, four in the UK, two in Germany, two in Austria and one in the Netherlands. It is also set to make its first foray into France by the end of the year.
Floor space 13% on the same time a year ago, bringing its total portfolio to 257 stores.
Weston said: "The weather in the runup to Christmas was really good for us because the cold got people buying jumpers earlier than usual. But the new year wasn't great. Who wants to buy a swimsuit when it's 2C outside?" He added that expansion plans will continue at the same speed next year, looking at potential sites across all regions. "The UK is slightly different, because we want to improve our stores with upgrades and expansions," he said.
The retailer's Newcastle and Manchester stores have been upgraded, with 9,300 sq metres (100,000 sq ft) added, while plans are under way for a similar expansion of its Glasgow store.
In London, Primark opened a second store on Oxford Street. The company said the launch had been a success, but it was muted by comparison to the first Oxford Street store near Marble Arch, which forced part of the street to close because of the crowds.
Retailers including Debenhams, Tesco and B&Q have all said future stores will be smaller as shoppers turn to online, but Primark will move in the opposite direction. Weston said: "Our stores have actually been too small and future stores will generally be bigger than they were before." He said Primark would definitely not launch a website, urging customers instead to "keep toddling down to Oxford Street".
"It is enough for us to have great fashion, in good locations at the right price. That simply works for us. We don't have a problem that needs fixing."
The City appeared to agree, as ABF shares closed at an all-time high of £19.99, up 8%.
In the diverse company's other operations, sales at ABF's grocery business, including Twinings, Ryvita, Patak's and Kingsmill bread, were up to £1.83bn as operating profits rose from £75m to £97m.
However, bosses warned that wheat costs would increase following one of the worst UK harvests in several decades. Kingsmill turned to more imports to make up the shortfall in the British crop.
What can Primark, with its soaring sales, teach struggling M&S? In terms of fashion probably not so much.
If you want to buy a printed bikini tomorrow, either store will provide you with ample choice, albeit at different price points. But in terms of shopping experiences, the two are entirely different propositions.
Primark is a destination shop. It has to be, because you cannot buy its products online. Shoppers forgo virtual browsing and comparison in favour of an actual trolley dash.
Can't decide between the geometric or floral bikini? It doesn't matter, because at £3 a pop, it's easier to buy both and stuff them into the store's capacious brown paper carrier bags rather than spend time making a decision.
Speed and volume are paramount at Primark: immediate trends, snatched off the rails, bought in bulk, items often worn just once.
It manages to combine frantic fast fashion with the time honoured market tradition of getting a bargain. It's the shopping equivalent of chewing gum as opposed to actually eating – Primark style is addictive and moreish but unsatisfying.
M&S attempts something more nuanced with its fashion – subtle trend interpretations for a variety of different customers.
Perhaps these figures suggest that shoppers just don't want their retailers to be that thoughtful? Imogen Fox